### Date: October 20, 2023

Tar archive

We can use an UNIX command to make a TAR archive

tar -vczf p1.tar \<list of files\>

File names are separated by spaces.

__WHAT TAs should Ideally be able to do___

tar -xf p1.tar
make
./memgrind
cat README

Midterms will mostly be short answer (non-coding) questions.
- If there are coding questions they will be super brief.
- Exam topics will be mentioned next week

---

Recap:

We looked at the open (2 versions), close, and read / write.

- If we are writing we cap the number of bytes we can write.


int open(char* path, int flags);


int open(char* path, int flags, mode_t mode);
    returns:
        file descriptor
        -1 on error and sets errno


int close(int fd);
    returns:
        0 for success
        -1 on error and sets errno

ssize_t read(int fd, void * buff, size_t buffer_length);
    returns: number of bytes read
        0 for EOF.
        -1 for error and sets errno.

ssize_t write(int fd, void* buffer, size_t buffer_length);
    returns: number of bytes written
        -1 on error and sets errno.

Experiment writing and reading from ~/dev/full and ~/dev/null.

We can write ANYTHING into files using write.

To test this try the following C code:

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <unistd.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <fcntl.h>

    int main(){

        int a[] = {a, 2, 4, 17, 256, 0 1 << 30};

        int i = 0;

        int fd = open("output.txt", O_WRONLY | O_CREAT | O_TRUNC, 0600);

        if(fd < 0){

            perror("output.txt");
            exit(EXIT_FAILURE);

        }

        write(fd, a 7 * sizeof(int))
;



    }

Can we read back the date?:

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <unistd.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <fcntl.h>

    int main(){

        int fd, i;
        char * fname = argc > 1 ? argv[1] : output.txt;

        fd = open(fname, O_RDONLY);

        if (fd < 0){
            perror(fname);
            exit(EXITFAILURE);
        }

        while ((bytes = read(fd, &i, sizeof(i))) > 0){
            printf("READ %d\n", i);
            // There is no conversion happening
            // when we read or write, the only
            // conversion is happening in printf
        }

        if(bytes == -1){
            perror(fname);
            exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
        }

        close(fd);

        // Of yje fo;e yjay we are yruomh yp read from does
        // not have read permissions then we get a permission denied
        // error. Perror prints out the message in a particular format.

    }

---

## Permissions

3 Groups of permissions: owner (u), group (g), others (o)

*And a, represents all*

Scripts that start with the hashbang:

    #! /usr/bin/python3

    print("Hello World")

Even though this file may be a text (.txt file),
it is interpreted via the shebang comment at the beginning.

Remember to chmod u+x script.py otherwise you may
not have permissions to run the script.

chmod is the command shorthand for changemode. 

Usage:

    chmod [group][+-][permissions] [paths_to_ciles]

ex:
    chmod a+rw
    # Gives everyone read and write permissions.

    chmod o-w
    # Removes write permission from others group

You can also choose to use the less verbose octal version:

**MIGHT BE ON MIDTERM**

Usage: chmod [octal code][file paths]

Ex:
    chmod 744 file.o
    # User has all permissions (111) and group and others
    # only get read permissions (100)

You can check the permissions:

    ls -l filename
    ls -dl directoryname

Execute permissions have two purposes:

1) For normal files, it gives permission to execute the file (file must have
   a known exec format).

2) For directories, execute gives permissions to list contents of the directory. 

**Kf you give a read permission to a file, you still need execute permission on the directory to read the file.**

---

## lseek function

Every file has a pointer / cursor in in it. The cursor helps us keep track
of what byte we are reading or writing to.

lseek allows you to manually change that pointer in any arbitrary location
in the file.

man 2 lseek

lseek allows you to skip beyond the end of a file, if data is later written
into the file, reading the file will result in seeing a hole (a bunch of null
bytes) in that spot until data is written.

**Not needed for this class fyi.**

---

## Open files

Each process has its own list of open files (often referred to as the file table).

- File descriptors are essentially indices of the file table.
- Each file record held in the process tells us what the file is
  (file on disk, input stream, output stream, network stream)
- It also keeps track of position in the file (the cursor)
- When a process ends it also closes each file in the file table
  before terminating.

Pipes are a pair of files that I can read into from one and write
into another end.

The OS also keeps a table of open files

- open files can be shared across processes (ex. stdin, stdout).
- When we open a new process it inherits all the open files.

Example: 

check the following c file:


---
