Last time we coded a program to write to read from a file.

- We chose to use a buffer of a predetermined size but did
  not wait for the buffer to fill up.

read() returns up to the requested number of bytes.
- It may return fewer bytes if the number of bytes in the input stream
  is less than the requested amount, or if some data is available but
  not enough is available to fill the buffer.

read() blocks if no data is available, but the stream is open.

- What this means is that the program waits until data arrives.

As a consequence, read only returns 0 if the input stream is closed,
otherwise more data may arrive. For a file, when we reach the end
of the file the stream autocloses, but for other input streams
we cannot be sure.

Exceptions:

- We can type Ctrl-D to immeadiately return stdinput. (This fakes an input),
  this is the only case that read returns 0.

- We can create input streams in non-blocking mode. For non-blocking streams,
  these streams return -1 and set errno to EAGAIN (no data back but try later),
  or EWOULDBLOCK (this would have caused a blocking issue).

As a reminder this was the code we left off with last class:

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <stdlib.h>
    #include <unistd.h>
    #include <fcntl.h>
    #include <string.h>
    #define DEBUG 1
    #define BUFSIZE 16
    
    void accept_line(char *line)
    {
        printf("Got a line: |%s|\n", line);
        free(line);
    }
    int main(int argc, char **argv)
    {
        char buf[BUFSIZE];
        int pos, bytes, line_length = 0, fd, start;
        char *line = NULL;
        
        if (argc > 1) {
            fd = open(argv[1], O_RDONLY);
            if (fd < 0) {
                perror(argv[1]);
                exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
            }
        } else {
            fd = STDIN_FILENO;
        }
    
        while ((bytes = read(fd, buf, BUFSIZE)) > 0) {
        if (DEBUG) printf("Read %d bytes\n", bytes);
        // search input for a newline character
        start = 0;
            for (pos = 0; pos < bytes; pos++) {
                if (buf[pos] == '\n') {
                    int len = pos - start;
                    line = realloc(line, line_length + len + 1);
                    memcpy(line + line_length, buf + start, len);
                    line_length = line_length + len;
                    line[line_length] = '\0';
                    accept_line(line);
                    line = NULL;
                    line_length = 0;
                    start = pos + 1;
                }
            }

            if (start < bytes){
                int len = bytes - start;
                line = realloc(line, line_length + len + 1);
                memcpy(line + line_length, buf + start, len);
                line_length += len;
                line[line_length] = '\0';
                if (DEBUG) printf("Partial line |%s|; %d bytes\n", line, line_length);
            }
        }

        close(fd);
        return EXIT_SUCCESS;
    }

We did not know how many buffers a single line may take, hence
why we fixed the code by utilizing realloc and assume that
each line may contain a variable number of bytes (beyond the buffer size).

- If a line begins in one buffer and ends in another, it works.
- If a line occupies several buffer lengths how do we ensure we capture
  the whole line.

"My intention was to include the newline character in the string,
but in this case we did not"

Another approach we could use is to build our own data structure.

Here is what that would look like:

    typedef struct {
        int bufpos;
        int buflen;
        int fd;
        int buf[BUFSIZE];
    } LINES;

    LINES * lines_fdinit(int fd);
    LINES * lopen(char* path);

    void lclose(LINES *);
    char* getline(LINES *);

The actual implementation of these methods is given on Canvas!
I will add it to the end of these notes if I get the chance to post them.

With this code we are emulating the "f" prefix methods which are
the buffered methods (fscaf, fprintf, e.t.c)

The outer while-loop calls read repeatedly, repeatedly filling the buffer.
- The inner loop goes byte by byte through the buffer, if it detects
  a new line character then...

---

## UNIX File System (UFS) and UFS-line file systems

We can generally think of two kinds of blocks of memory:
- data blocks (store contents of files)
- metadata blocks (AKA inode blocks) (store metadata about a file)

Every file on the disk is associated with a unique inode.
- Inodes are referred to by index number / serial number

The goal is that **if you know the index number of a file, we can find its inode quickly**

(In reality you need the device number + inode number to identify the file
but we ignore this completely).

**What does the inode contain?**

It contains information on the owner of the file (the user and group),
the modes (permissions), the length of the file in bytes,
creation/modification timestamps,
how many times it occurs in the file system (# of hard links),
and information (block pointers) that point to the datablocks.

Depending on the file system the block size varies
- Commonly it as set at 4 to 8 KB

problem:
    - All inodes need to be the same size!
    - We want fast access to any block in the file. (not a damn linked list).
    - We want to able to represent large af files (MB and GB sized).
    - We want to efficiently represent small files.

solution:
    - 4 types of pointers (different levels of indirection)
    - 12 direct pointers. (points to data blocks)
    - If your file is too big for that, then we add another pointer, an indirect pointer.
    - The indirect pointer points to a data block which is actually a cluster of pointers
      to other data blocks.
    - If your file is too big for a single indirect pointer, we make and
      use a double indirect pointer. This a pointer to a pointer to a pointer.
    - If the file is too big for that then we use a triple indirect pointer,
      but typically there is no indirection further than that.

    - Since there is nothing beyond triple indirection, this introduces
      a limit on how big a single file can be!

If the length of the file does not require more than 12 direct pointers,
then the indirect pointer never gets used!

There is a difference between file names and inodes,
both are identifiers but...

- Every absolute path identifies at most one inode

directories contain a mapping of names to inodes,
absolution path for a file is the abs path of its directory plus its name.

The linking of a filename to an inode is called a "hard link",
this enables us to link the same inode in multiple places under
different aliases.

- In UNIX, an inode maybe referred to by multiple paths.
- Multiple names can link to the same file (inode).
- If the hard link count in the inode drops to 0 this means that
  no path in any path refers to it and the file can be safely deleted.

Directories typically have 2 or more hard links, one with its parent,
and every directory is linked to itself via the "."

- If there are subdirectories, then the upper level directory also has
  hard links with each of its subdirectories.

- Special CASE: the root is its own parent.

The "ln" command allows us to create a new link for a file.

Ex:
    ln <existing file> <additional name>

    ln foo bar
    # creates bar, which links to the same file as foo.
    # foo and bar will link to the same inode.

    $echo hello > foo
    $ln foo bar
    # Creates bar, which refers to the same file as foo.
    $rm foo
    # Unlinks foo, but bar still exists.


If given an inode, I cannot tell where the file is in the directory,
I just have to linearly search the entire directory.


mv unlinks a source file name and relinks it at the destination 
