## Using Directories

A directory is a file containing directory entries.

- Each directory entry has at least a name and an inode number

Entries in a directory may correspond to:
    - regular files,
    - other directories
    - soft links
    - block devices (physical devices)
    - named pipes (FIFO)

For the purposes of the class we'll interact with regular
files and other directories directly.

We can actually pass directories to open(), but that ain't useful

## opendir()

#include <dirent.h>

DIR *opendir(char * pathname)

Takes an absolute path or a relative path to the directory,
it opens a directory and returns a pointer to the DIR structure

---

or null.

## readdir()

struct dirent readdir(DIR *directory_pointer)

Returns a pointer to a directory entry structure
- This may be overwritten the next time we call readdir()
- do not free this pointer, we didn't create this pointer!

---

## The struct dirent

Here is the structure:

    struct dirent{
        ino_t d_ino; // The inode number for the entry.
        char[] d_name; // The name (null terminated string) (IMPORTANT, NAMES IN DIRECTORY)
    }

There are some other values that may be in the struct which
are not guaranteed to exist.

    unsigned char d_type; // The file type

Potential file types include: DT_BLK, DT_CHR, e.t.c.

---

## closedir()

int closedir(DIR * dirp)

This function can fail if the directory is already closed,
but should never fail under normal circumstances.
- Returns 0 on success, -1 on failure (and sets errno).


**In what order are entries returned from the directory?
There is no order really!**

---

You can use the stat function from fcntl.h to get details about the file,
like a lot of details!

- The access() function that tell you basic file permissions.
  This is a pretty useless way to do this though.

- If you can't access a file for the project, print out a message
  saying you could not open a file.

---

**If you open up foo and see an entry called bar which is a subdirectory,
you have to say open("foo/bar"), you cannot simply say open bar.**

|
+input.txt
|
+ foo
  |
  + input.txt

memcpy and strcpy are ways to keep appending to file names.

